JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
terror in Brussels: ISIS claims
responsibility
for blasts at an airport and
subway, killing
at least 30 -- how Europe
grapples with another
deadly attack.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Tuesday: President
Obama wraps up his historic trip
to Cuba with
a promise to bury the remnants
of the Cold
War.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And preparing for
disaster
when living near the most
dangerous fault
line in America.
FAWN SHARP, President, Quinault
Indian Nation:
So many of our memories are here
in this village,
and the thought of it being
underwater, you
know, there's a lot of trauma to
that prospect
that a very sacred site could no
longer exist.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: Once again, a major
European capital
has been shut down by terror.
Today's bombings
in Brussels left at least 31
people dead.
More than 180 were wounded,
including an undetermined
number of Americans.
The attacks paralyzed the city
for most of
the day, and triggered an
all-out manhunt.
Thick smoke and screams of panic
captured
by a cell phone moments after
double explosions
rocked the Belgian capital's
airport. Suitcases
stood abandoned as would-be
passengers scrambled
over collapsed ceilings and
shattered windows.
WOMAN: I hear an explosion. And
all the ceilings
is going down. And then I just
go under the
sink. And then the second
explosion went.
And then everything is black.
And I see -- when
I go out, I see all -- a lot of
people with
blood.
MAN (through translator): I
tried to flee
towards the arrivals and we
couldn't get there,
and there was glass everywhere,
crash, crash,
crash everywhere. And we went
toward the taxis.
It was a total confusion. It was
truly hell.
GWEN IFILL: Belgian prosecutors
say it was
the work of two suicide bombers,
attacking
just seconds apart, during the
morning rush.
They say a third suspect
escaped. Passengers
and employees alike streamed out
of the smoldering
entrance, while hundreds of
others were evacuated
to the tarmac.
Then, about an hour later,
another blast,
this time on a subway train as
it left a station
near the European Union's
headquarters. Footage
posted to social media showed
passengers evacuating
one car as emergency personnel
treated the
wounded.
MAN (through translator): These
are war injuries.
I have more than 40 years of
experience on
the job, so I have seen a lot of
things. I
think this is the worst thing I
have ever
seen in my career.
GWEN IFILL: The twin attacks,
claimed by the
Islamic State group, sent
Belgium's terror
alert to the highest level and
put the entire
city under lockdown for hours.
Police found
a third bomb at the airport and
disposed of
it.
Flights and train service were
canceled or
diverted, and people were
ordered to remain
in place.
CHARLES MICHEL, Belgian Prime
Minister (through
translator): Ladies and
gentlemen, what we
feared has happened. Our country
and our citizens
have been hit by blind, violent
and cowardly
attacks. We are confronted with
a challenge,
a difficult challenge, and we
must face it
by standing united, showing
solidarity and
staying together.
GWEN IFILL: The attacks in
Brussels came four
days after the arrest there of
Salah Abdeslam,
the top suspect in November's
terror attacks
in Paris that left 130 dead.
And they cast new doubts on
Belgian intelligence-gathering
and security.
The "NewsHour"'s chief foreign
affairs correspondent,
Margaret Warner, spoke with the
Belgian ambassador
to the United States in
Washington today
JOHAN VERBEKE, Belgian
Ambassador to the United
States: Some indications pointed
to the fact
that something may happen. The
security levels
were heightened. The presence of
security
people, including military,
quite visible,
had been enhanced. And still it
happened,
so the answer to your question
is, it can
happen even when you take all
security preparedness.
GWEN IFILL: World leaders,
including President
Obama, pledged solidarity with
the Belgians.
He learned of the attacks on the
second day
of his visit to Cuba.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
We will do whatever is necessary
to support
our friend and ally Belgium in
bringing to
justice those who are
responsible, and this
is yet another reminder that the
world must
unite. We must be together,
regardless of
nationality or race or faith, in
fighting
against the scourge of
terrorism.
GWEN IFILL: And in Paris,
President Francois
Hollande urged leaders
everywhere to recognize
the danger.
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE, French
President (through
translator): Terrorism hit
Belgium, but Europe
was targeted, and the whole
world is concerned.
We are facing a global threat,
which demands
a global response.
GWEN IFILL: The immediate
response in Britain,
France, Germany and elsewhere,
was to bolster
security at airports, train
stations and border
crossings.
In the U.S., similar measures
were taken in
major urban areas, including
Washington and
New York.
BILL DE BLASIO (D), Mayor of New
York: Let
me say at the outset, there is
no specific
and credible threat against New
York City
at this time, but we are in a
high state of
vigilance and readiness.
GWEN IFILL: The Brussels
Airport, meanwhile,
will stay closed at least
through Wednesday.
Later today, President Obama
ordered U.S.
flags lowered to half-staff at
government
buildings. And the Department of
Homeland
Security said it has no credible
intelligence
of any threat to the United
States. We will
return to the Brussels attacks
after the news
summary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The bombings
dominated much
of the day for the U.S.
presidential candidates.
Republican front-runner Donald
Trump suggested
using torture to disrupt future
attacks.
He told NBC -- quote -- "If they
can expand
the laws, I would do a lot more
than water-boarding.
You have to get the information
from these
people" -- end quote.
Trump's rival Ted Cruz went
further, calling
for police surveillance of
Muslim neighborhoods.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
It's standard good policing to
direct your
resources to where the threat is
coming from.
We should do the exact same
thing are radical
Islamic terrorism. We need to
work proactively
with the Muslim community
cooperatively, just
like when law enforcement is
going after gang
activity, you work with the
community where
gangs are located.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the Democratic
side, Hillary
Clinton called for policies that
are -- quote
-- "consistent with our values."
And she told
NBC: "It's unrealistic to say
we're going
to completely shut down our
borders to everyone."
Fellow Democrat Bernie Sanders
appealed for
international solidarity, as did
Republican
John Kasich. Both parties hold
nominating
primaries today in Arizona and
Utah. Democrats
also hold caucuses in Idaho.
GWEN IFILL: A planned courtroom
battle between
Apple and the FBI never happened
today. Instead,
federal prosecutors said they
may not need
Apple to unlock the iPhone used
by the mass
shooters in San Bernardino. They
say an outside
party came forward over the
weekend and showed
the FBI how to access data on
the encrypted
phone after all.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The new NATO and
U.S. commander
in Afghanistan apologized today
for the American
bombing of a hospital last year.
General John Nicholson traveled
to Kunduz
and met with victims' relatives
and staff
at the now-closed hospital. The
October strike
killed 42 people and wounded
dozens more.
A U.S. investigation found that
it was -- quote
-- "tragic and avoidable," and
more than a
dozen military personnel were
punished.
GWEN IFILL: In Indonesia,
thousands of taxi
drivers protested in Jakarta,
demanding a
ban on Uber and other
ride-hailing apps. The
demonstration wreaked traffic
chaos in the
city's already-congested
streets. Cabbies
carried banners denouncing the
competition
as illegal, and even assaulted
some motorbike
drivers working for the apps.
MAN (through translator): Close
Uber and GrabCar,
please, because we're suffering
losses now.
The government said the apps
will encourage
young people to use public
transport. But
since GrabCar and Uber came into
the market,
we have been having a hard time
earning a
living.
GWEN IFILL: Today marked the
second such protest
by taxi drivers in Jakarta this
month.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The former mayor
of Toronto,
Canada, Rob Ford, died today,
after a career
marred by drinking and drug
problems. Ford
was elected in 2010, but a
series of scandals
erupted, and he ultimately
admitted using
crack cocaine. He dropped a
reelection bid
after being diagnosed with a
rare cancer,
but later won a city council
seat. Rob Ford
was 46 years old.
GWEN IFILL: In economic news,
Wall Street
struggled to gain traction after
the Brussels
attacks hurt airline and travel
company stocks.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 41 points
to close at 17582. The Nasdaq
rose 12 points,
and the S&P 500 slipped about
two.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And about 30 of
the real-life
Rosie the Riveters were honored
in Washington
today for building planes and
doing other
vital jobs during World War II.
The women,
many in their 80s and 90s, took
a special
flight from Detroit. They wore
red and white
polka dot head scarves,
mimicking the image
in the famous "We Can Do It"
poster.
Later, they visited the U.S.
Capitol and the
World War II Memorial. It was
all part of
Women's History Month.
GWEN IFILL: Still to come on the
"NewsHour":
what the Brussels attacks mean
in the global
fight against terror; President
Obama pressures
Cuba on human rights; the
difficulties of
educating children in foster
care; and much
more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now back to the
attacks in
Brussels and the latest on the
investigation
into who was behind them.
We turn to Peter Spiegel. He's
the Brussels
bureau chief for The Financial
Times.
Welcome to you, Peter Spiegel.
So, what is the very latest
that's known about
figuring out who was behind
this?
PETER SPIEGEL, The Financial
Times: Well,
this evening, the Brussels
authorities put
out a photo of sort of three men
carrying
luggage carts at the airport
just before the
explosion.
They have identified them as,
they think,
the three perpetrators. Two of
them, they
believe, are the actual bombers,
and then
the third is on the loose now.
There have
been raids all day in the
Schaerbeek neighborhood,
which is just north of here.
They have more
evidence there that ISIS is --
that cell was
quite entrenched.
They found more bomb materials.
They found
chemicals. They found ISIS flags
and other
paraphernalia. They are trying
to basically
find out how broad and how deep
this network
was. It's suspected that it is
linked to arrests
that you mentioned in your
opening piece,
Salah Abdeslam, who was the --
one of the
bombers who sort of fled Paris
and didn't
kill himself, one of the only
surviving -- believed
to be one of the surviving
plotters from the
Paris attack.
The arrest happened on Friday.
There's some
speculation, some belief in the
officials
we talked to that perhaps these
plotters terrorists
moved up their attack because
they were afraid
Abdeslam was talking to police
and had maybe
ratted them out. And so there
was some belief
that they moved up the attack.
They're trying to find out right
now how much
that cell is implanted here in
Brussels. But
other than that, that claim of
credit that
ISIS has put out over their
Internet sites,
we really don't have a huge
amount of information
right now about who these guys
are, where
they were based.
The police have actually pled
for information
for the one person they think is
on the run.
So, yet again, sort of catching
authorities
by surprise and they don't have
a huge amount
of ideas right now about who
these guys are.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Brussels
was on high
alert, we know, after the arrest
of the Paris
suspect, Mr. Abdeslam, last week
and it had
been on alert since the Paris
attack.
A number of experts today are
saying, why
wasn't Brussels better prepared?
®MD+IT /MD-IT /PETER SPIEGEL:
Yes. And
the Belgian authorities have
come under a
lot of pressure, a lot of attack
even back
from the Paris attacks.
You remember the Paris attacks
were largely
organized here in Brussels in
the Molenbeek
neighborhood, which is really
just a mile
away from where I'm talking to
you here. So
this has been -- the Belgians
get very defensive
about this. Why all the Belgian
bashing?
But the fact of the matter is
that a number
of the jihadis, particularly
those who travel
into Syria as foreign fighters,
had come from
Brussels and other parts of
Belgium. Belgium
has the largest percentage of
nationals who
have gone to Syria and Iraq to
fight for ISIS.
And there is a perception, at
least, that
they had used Brussels as sort
of an organizing
place. The Belgian authorities
dispute this.
They don't think they're any
worse they Paris
or any of the other major cities
that have
large and sometimes radicalized
Muslim populations,
but what is true, in talking to
Belgian officials,
is that up until about 18 months
ago, Belgium
didn't invest in the
intelligence assets,
in the military assets that are
needed to
counter these kind of radical
groups.
After Charlie Hebdo in
particular and some
of the associated raids after
that, the new
Belgian government did start
ramping up the
amount of money they're putting
into their
intelligence services, into the
security services.
But the question is whether it's
been too
little too late.
They have to ramp up so quickly
to try to
get the handle on this thing,
that this could
have been a lapse and inability
because they
are so behind the heart of the
curve right
now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So,
®MD+IT /MD-IT /Peter
Spiegel, what is the security
situation there
now? Are they expecting more
attacks?
®MD+IT /MD-IT /PETER SPIEGEL:
Well, we're
back on level four, which is the
terror alert
for imminent attack.
But literally just a few hours
ago, they told
us all we could leave our
buildings. Parents
were able to pick their kids up
from school
who were basically held at the
school for
most of the afternoon. So we're
not in sort
of a lockdown situation, if you
remember,
after November, after the Paris
attacks, where
the Belgian authorities said we
had to sort
of like hide in place for about
a week.
We're not in that situation now.
There is
a general feeling that this
current attack
is now over, that they have this
cell on the
run or they have going into
hiding.
But, yes, there is nervousness
that because
they do have these suspects in
detention,
that these suspects and
particularly Abdeslam
have knowledge about the cells
that are operating
in Europe, that some of these
other cells
will come out and act now, for
fear of being
turned up and arrested in the
days to come.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Peter Spiegel,
who is the Brussels
bureau chief for The Financial
Times, we thank
you.
GWEN IFILL: For more on the
threat of terrorism
in Europe and beyond, I'm joined
by Rick Nelson
of Cross Match Technologies.
He's a former
Naval officer who served at the
National Security
Council and the National
Counterterrorism
Center. And Lorenzo Vidino,
director of the
program on Extremism at the
Center for Cyber
and Homeland Security at George
Washington
University. He is an expert on
radicalization
and terrorism in Europe and he
has advised
U.S. and European lawmakers.
Lorenzo Vidino, based on
everything that we
have just heard and everything
that we just
from the reporter in Brussels,
Peter Spiegel,
are we now engaged in truly a
global war now?
LORENZO VIDINO, George
Washington University:
I think it's undeniable that
ISIS has inspired
individuals worldwide to carry
out attacks.
And I think what we're seeing
now is that
ISIS is directing. That is kind
of the novelty
of the Paris attacks and part of
the Brussels
attacks today, is directly
engaged in attacking
North Africa, Middle East and
the West. So
we have more organized clusters
and networks
that have received training in
Syria and Iraq
and have received the order to
mobilize and
carry out the attacks.
So they are more sophisticated
than the individuals
who are just inspired by ISIS
ideology, like,
for example, the San Bernardino
shooters here
in the United States. There is a
different
degree of sophistication when
you receive
some sort of training and
experience in the
battlefield and radicalization
that ISIS provides
to individuals throughout
Europe.
GWEN IFILL: Rick Nelson, are you
persuaded
that this is connected to the
Paris attacks?
RICK NELSON, Cross Match
Technologies: I am
indeed persuaded.
ISIS has been building networks
in Europe
for close to three years now,
and there's
no doubt in my mind that there
are significant
networks throughout Europe,
leveraging Belgium
and Brussels in particular, and
we saw that
in France, but we saw that today
in Belgium.
And, unfortunately I think there
are going
to be more attacks on the
horizon that will
be connected to these cells.
GWEN IFILL: Well, staying with
you, Rick Nelson,
maybe you could answer for
people who just
follow this casually, why
Belgium?
RICK NELSON: Well, Belgium has a
number of
issues that it faces.
It really is a microcosm for the
larger issues
that are facing Europe. First
and foremost,
Europe in general, Belgium
specifically, has
not done a very good job of
integrating many
of these Muslim communities into
their larger
society. A lot of these
communities are in
enclaves in urban environments.
There is not a lot of hope for
jobs. There's
not a lot of hope to get out of
these environments,
and that really puts in place a
sense of disenfranchisement,
of marginalization, and ISIS and
other terrorist
groups are very, very effective
at capitalizing
on that marginalization and
getting these
individuals to join their cause
or to take
an act of violence that gives
them a larger
sense of meaning and perhaps a
pathway out
of the situation they find
themselves in.
GWEN IFILL: Lorenzo Vidino, do
Belgian authorities
have any kind of hold on this?
How do you
monitor suspicions? Are there
resources enough
to follow up on every single
threat that you
hear about or is reported to
you?
LORENZO VIDINO: No, I think
that's a general
problem throughout Europe, but
it's particularly
acute in Belgium, where --
because of a variety
of issues that have to do with
lack of investment
in intelligence and law
enforcement.
The federal nature of the
Belgian state, with
a lot of divisions with
different forces there
and don't talk to one another,
they are severely
understaffed. Add to that the
fact that Belgium
provides an incredibly large,
disproportionate
number of foreign fighters, so
they're stretched
extremely thin.
As I say, it's a problem
throughout Europe,
but particularly acute in
Belgium and investments
that have been made in law
enforcement now
are sort of a bit too little,
too late.
GWEN IFILL: Rick Nelson, how
should other
countries be responding if this
is indeed
now a global threat?
RICK NELSON: One of the things
this is going
to force in the European Union
and beyond
is the fact that these nations
are going to
have to share information more
readily than
they have in the past.
There has been some hesitation
by countries
to share intelligence
information throughout
the E.U. I think France started
the dialogue
moving forward. And Belgium, the
incidents
today just further reiterate
this, is that
the European nations are going
to have to
share intelligence and
information if they're
going to be successful against
these threats.
These threats, these attacks are
very basic.
They're very rudimentary, even
though the
command-and-control may be
sophisticated.
They're going to be very
difficult to identify
in advance unless there is very
credible intelligence
and the countries are going to
have to work
together to build that credible
intelligence
to thwart these attacks.
GWEN IFILL: Lorenzo Vidino, it
seems incredible
after all this time that there
wouldn't be
improved intelligence-sharing at
this stage.
LORENZO VIDINO: It has gotten
better over
the last few years.
There's more coordination. The
reality is
that there is a lot of talk of
creating sort
of a European FBI, a law
enforcement intelligence
agency that supervises the work.
There is
Europol, but Europol doesn't
really have the
same basic capabilities that a
real transnational,
pan-European law enforcement
agency would
have.
It facilitates the passage of
information,
but really doesn't have
arresting powers.
Really, 99 percent, I would say,
of the counterterrorism
capability rests with individual
countries.
And you have those petty
jealousies, those
political issues, those divides
that create
a lot of problems.
Terrorists don't know borders.
They go from
one European country to the
other. Law enforcement,
intelligence are very much stuck
within their
own borders.
GWEN IFILL: Rick Nelson,
whenever we have
talked about battling ISIS, at
least in this
country, it's always seemed
territorial, putting
boots on the ground, somehow
saving Raqqa,
making it a very Syrian-based
war. Is this
something that now is going to
have -- are
we going to have to expand our
thinking about
how to battle ISIS?
RICK NELSON: Well, absolutely.
You know, what we have seen with
all -- most
terrorist groups, at least in
the last 15
years, that, you know, the idea
of having
a safe haven or a piece of
terrorist territory
from which to operate is
critical to these
organizations.
And what has made -- one of the
things that
has made ISIS so successful is
that they do
have a piece of territory in
Syria and Iraq,
where they are building, have
the ability
to plan, the ability to
communicate, the ability
to train. They have got a safe
haven in that
area of the world where they can
train these
fighters, send them back, they
can communicate
relatively freely.
And as long as they have the
area to operate
freely and to plan and conduct
these types
of attacks, you are going to see
these cells
continue to grow and continue to
be a problem
for not only Europe, but the
United States.
GWEN IFILL: And as long as there
is a civil
war that shows no signs of
abating in Syria,
is there any way to really get
to the root
of this?
LORENZO VIDINO: I think that's
very difficult.
Rick is spot on in saying that
as long as
there is a base there in Syria
and Iraq, and
particularly in Syria, there's
no end in sight,
I think the problem will be
there.
If anything, actually, it's
getting more acute,
because we're seeing that ISIS
is developing
also secondary bases. I think
Libya is particularly
interesting. We are starting to
see that there's
a minor flow of foreign fighters
no longer
going to Syria and Iraq, but
going to Libya,
which is obviously even closer
to Europe.
And I think that's also very
problematic.
GWEN IFILL: Is it fair to say
that Belgium,
France, the United States should
be bracing
for more attacks?
LORENZO VIDINO: I think
particularly in Europe,
I think that's a very likely
scenario.
I think the United States faces
a minor threat
compared to -- a smaller threat
compared to
Europe. We do not see the same
level of sophistication.
We see individuals that are
linked to ISIS
from an ideological point of
view, very few
with operational ties that do
exist here,
but the size, the magnitude of
the threat
in Europe is much, much bigger.
GWEN IFILL: Lorenzo Vidino of
George Washington
University and Rick Nelson of
Cross Match
Technologies, thank you both
very much.
LORENZO VIDINO: Pleasure.
RICK NELSON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We earlier heard
from President
Obama in Cuba when he spoke of
the Brussels
attacks. He had additional
business to do
in Havana today, including a
major address
to the Cuban people.
John Yang reports.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
I believe in the Cuban people.
JOHN YANG: In the final speech
of his historic
visit, President Obama laid out
a future of
possibilities, but no
guarantees.
BARACK OBAMA: I have come here
to bury the
last remnant of the Cold War in
the Americas.
I want the Cuban people,
especially the young
people, to understand why I
believe that you
should look to the future with
hope, not the
false promise which insists that
things are
better than they really are, or
the blind
optimism that says all your
problems can go
away tomorrow.
JOHN YANG: With state TV beaming
the speech
into Cuban households, Mr. Obama
talked of
freedom.
BARACK OBAMA: But let me tell
you what I believe.
I can't force you to agree, but
you should
know what I think.
I believe citizens should be
free to speak
their mind without fear, to
organize and to
criticize their government and
to protest
peacefully, and that the rule of
law shouldn't
include arbitrary detentions of
people who
exercise those rights.
JOHN YANG: Yesterday, the
communist island's
state-run media ignored Cuban
President Raul
Castro's tense exchange with
American reporters
on political prisoners. But,
today, with all
of Cuba watching, Mr. Obama
directly addressed
Castro, who looked on from a
balcony.
BARACK OBAMA: And given your
commitment to
Cuba's sovereignty and
self-determination,
I am also confident that you
need not fear
the different voices of the
Cuban people and
their capacity to speak and
assemble and vote
for their leaders.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Obama went on to
urge the Castro
government to improve commercial
ties. At
the same time, he repeated his
own commitment
to lift the U.S. trade embargo.
BARACK OBAMA: It is an outdated
burden on
the Cuban people. It's a burden
on the Americans
who want to work and do business
or invest
here in Cuba. It's time to lift
the embargo.
JOHN YANG: This isn't the first
time the president's
made that pledge, and he took
nearly 40 members
of Congress along to reinforce
the message.
But here in Washington, the odds
of getting
lawmakers to approve a total
repeal of the
embargo remain slim. There are
still major
roadblocks, due mainly to Cuba's
human rights
record.
House Speaker Paul Ryan
reinforced that point
today at a briefing.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House:
And the president takes a trip
to Cuba, where
he effectively gets nothing in
return, and
he legitimizes a tyrannical
dictatorship.
The irony wasn't lost on me.
BARACK OBAMA: All the
individuals around this
table have shown extraordinary
courage.
JOHN YANG: After his speech in
Havana, Mr.
Obama met with Cuban dissidents
at the U.S.
Embassy. He praised their
courage and said
America's own history is proof
of how change
can come.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us for a
look at the
first baseball game between Cuba
and an American
Major League team in nearly 20
years; plus,
refugees in limbo as a new deal
promises to
send them back Turkey; and
preparing for what
some say is the inevitable, a
tsunami on the
West Coast.
But, first, they are among the
most difficult
populations to educate. When
compared to their
peers, children living in foster
care are
far more likely to be suspended
or expelled
from school, and end up
incarcerated or homeless
later in life.
But in Pittsburgh, the city's
child welfare
system has tried an innovative
approach that
could become a model for others.
The "NewsHour"'s April Brown has
the first
of two stories, part of our
American Graduate
series, a public media
initiative funded by
the Corporation for Public
Broadcasting, and
the latest installment in our
weekly series
Making the Grade.
APRIL BROWN: At only 19 years
old, Lafayette
Goode has already faced a
lifetime of challenges
growing up in a rough section of
Pittsburgh.
LAFAYETTE GOODE, Former Foster
Youth: I got
kicked out of my house at 13.
That was the
hardest thing I ever had to deal
with, because
I couldn't believe my mom was
really trying
to kick me out at this age.
Like, I'm so young.
Like, where am I going to go?
APRIL BROWN: Where Lafayette
went was into
Allegheny County's child welfare
system before
he turned 14. As a foster youth,
he was hardly
alone.
DAVID SANDERS, Casey Family
Programs: There
are about 400,000 children in
foster care
nationally.
APRIL BROWN: David Sanders is a
vice president
at Casey Family Programs, an
organization
that works to improve foster
care across the
nation.
DAVID SANDERS: If you walk in as
a social
worker to a child's home, it
might be the
very last time that that child
ever sees their
bedroom.
And I think, oftentimes, we
forget that to
get into foster care, they were
abused or
neglected probably to a level
that is quite
significant to actually be moved
from their
families.
APRIL BROWN: The educational
statistics for
youth in foster care have been
consistently
grim. Multistate studies have
found that just
50 percent finish high school.
Of that group,
only 20 percent go on to
college, and fewer
than one in 10 of those students
actually
earn a bachelor's degree.
For all his early challenges,
Lafayette Goode
is now on a positive path. He
graduated high
school on time, and is planning
to start a
trade school program soon. How
he beat the
odds is a testament to a network
of support
systems put in place by Marc
Cherna, who was
hired 20 years ago to take over
the county's
child welfare system.
MARC CHERNA, Director, Allegheny
County Department
of Human Services: It was a
system that was
out of control. It had quite a
few child deaths.
It had caseloads that were
expanding every
month. Very few, if any, systems
were in place
at all. And we were vilified by
the community.
APRIL BROWN: Cherna began his
reform effort
by asking the community
questions.
MARC CHERNA: The worst thing you
can do is
come into a place and say, I
have got all
the answers.
APRIL BROWN: The tradition of
community consultation
continues today, both in large
groups and
in smaller ones. We joined
Cherna recently
at Ritter's, a local diner
that's like his
second office, because he has so
many breakfast
meetings here.
Since coming to Pittsburgh,
Cherna has helped
dramatically reduce caseloads,
and pushed
for more supports that allow
children in the
system to stay with family
members.
MARC CHERNA: Kids do better in
their own homes
whenever possible. And the
highest correlation
for really low grades and
attendance and everything
else is, the more they move, the
worse things
are. Just something as simple as
that, identifying
that and then doing
intervention, it really
can make a difference for kids.
APRIL BROWN: Cherna's office
also started
collecting data, loads of it,
including data
from the Pittsburgh Public
Schools. It revealed
that fewer than one-third of
kids in foster
care have a 2.5 GPA or higher.
And only about
42 percent of them were
proficient in reading.
Another hallmark of Cherna's
tenure has been
hiring adults who went through
the system
themselves to mentor and
advocate for current
foster youth. They're known as
youth support
partners.
And Justin Quast (ph) is the man
Lafayette
relies on. He sometimes gives
rides and is
trained to provide anything from
emotional
support to helping youth get
social services
and building job skills..
JUSTIN QUAST, Youth Support
Partner: He's
like so close to my age that we
understand
each other. As soon as we met,
we just clicked.
BROWN: Youth support partner
Lanika Dorsey
once needed a mentor herself.
LANIKA DORSEY, Youth Support
Partner: I think
I first entered the system when
I was around
3 or 4.
APRIL BROWN: Lanika says abuse,
neglect and
constantly being forced to move
eventually
made her feel broken. She says,
for years,
she couldn't trust anyone. But
that changed
when she was paired with youth
support partner
Jovanna Robinson (ph).
LANIKA DORSEY: She kept her
word. She made
me trust people and believe
people when they
said things to me. That's
something I never
had growing up throughout the
system.
APRIL BROWN: It was Jovanna who
suggested
Lanika could use her experiences
and become
a youth support partner herself.
LANIKA DORSEY: Me being able to
help kids
helps me in a way, you know,
because I see
myself in them a lot. But I'm a
work in progress.
Every day, I still work on me.
I'm still lost,
just not as lost.
APRIL BROWN: In addition to
youth support
partners, Allegheny County has
also hired
educational liaisons like
William Battles.
Battles makes sure foster youth
like 19-year-old
Jazmin Holmes (ph) are in class,
have the
credits to graduate high school,
and he makes
them aware of benefits like
scholarships that,
as foster youth, they're
eligible for.
Battles recently helped Jazmin
through the
enrollment process at the
Community College
of Allegheny County.
WILLIAM BATTLES, Educational
Liaison: It's
very rewarding, because when you
are able
to help them navigate the whole
admissions
process and financial aid, it
kind of eases
their mind of schools and
everything else
that's going on in their life
too, on top
of a fresh start at a community
college or
university.
APRIL BROWN: While many foster
youth like
Jazmin focus on the future, it
has been important
to the county's reform process
to have some
of them reflect on the past.
Twenty-year-old Naadiya Cellars
was placed
in foster care five years ago
after her mother
died. She's now encouraging
Pittsburgh residents
to consider becoming foster
parents. Naadiya
says it's often difficult to get
people to
simply remember that they are
kids.
NAADIYA CELLARS, Former Foster
Youth: The
hardest part about being in
foster care is
that you are not allowed to do
everything
else that everybody else is
allowed to do.
Like, all the rules, like, you
are not allowed
to spend the night at your
friend's house
unless they have clearances.
Those are always
the hardest parts.
DAVID SANDERS: They want to be
seen as young
people who are facing life's
challenges, have
the same dreams that any other
young person
has, but so often the fact that
they have
been in foster care, they feel
like they are
then stigmatized as being
failures or unlikely
to succeed.
And I think one of the most
important things
is to really dispel that notion.
APRIL BROWN: Casey Family
Programs' David
Sanders credits Marc Cherna for
creating innovative
programs that have helped reduce
the number
of youth in foster care by 60
percent over
the last two decades.
But replicating that kind of
success elsewhere
is no easy task, Sanders says.
One major reason for that?
DAVID SANDERS: The turnover
among child welfare
leaders makes it very difficult
to sustain
progress. So, even if somebody
puts something
in place, what often happens is
that it's
dismantled as soon as somebody
new comes in,
and that rotation of leaders
happens every
year-and-a-half or two years.
APRIL BROWN: As new data comes
in, it's being
used to find out how well their
reforms are
working. And Marc Cherna knows
his work is
far from finished.
MARC CHERNA: I have been doing
this work for
over 40 years and if there was a
magic bullet,
we wouldn't be talking about it
today. This
is very complex work. There is
no easy solution.
There have been billions and
billions of dollars
spent on this.
There's a lot of people way
smarter than me
who thought about this, and I
still struggle
with it.
APRIL BROWN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm April
Brown in Pittsburgh.
GWEN IFILL: Online, you can read
more on how
data is being used to support
Pennsylvania's
most vulnerable children.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The United
Nations Refugee
Agency says it will not
cooperate with a European
plan to deport migrants arriving
in Greece
from Turkey.
UNHCR said it would no longer
help to transfer
migrants and refugees to
detention centers,
from which some could be
deported. The agency's
action could disrupt the deal
with Turkey
signed last Friday, which is
aimed at halting
the migrant flow. And the walls
being rebuilt
in Europe will likely only grow
taller after
today's attacks in Brussels.
From the island of Lesbos, in
Greece, special
correspondent Malcolm Brabant
reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This was one of
the last
boats to land on the beaches of
southern Lesbos.
It was a desperate attempt to
beat the deadline
set by Europe, which effectively
shut down
the refugee trail.
The screams marked the moment of
realization
that two people had been
suffocated in the
chaos and darkness of the
crossing. As medical
teams fought in vain to revive
the crush victims,
a Syrian called Bashir spoke to
the migrants'
aspirations.
MAN: We hope they don't take
this into effect.
We hope that we can make it to
Europe. I don't
know if we get there. If we are
lucky, we
can move on. If we are not, I
don't know what
will happen to us.
MALCOLM BRABANT: For two
consecutive nights,
the vigil of these volunteers on
the beaches
of southern Lesbos has been
futile. They have
spent long cold nights
anticipating new arrivals,
using the cover of darkness to
avoid Turkish
patrols.
But no one has reached the
shore. Spanish
lifeguards, who've rescued
thousands of people
over the winter months have, for
the moment,
been made redundant by the ships
of Frontex,
Europe's border agency,
patrolling the waters
dividing Turkey from Greece.
Yet volunteer Rebecca
Michaelides believes
the exodus from Turkey is just
temporarily
on hold.
REBECCA MICHAELIDES, Volunteer:
The people
will keep on coming because
they're very desperate
in leaving Turkey and just
trying for a better
future. Being turned back for us
and for myself
is not really a solution to the
problem.
It's a lot deeper, and going
back to as deep
as the war in Syria that needs
to be stopped,
but also to the hardship of
these people and
what they're going through, that
we need,
as Europe, to be -- to help
them.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The efforts to
reinforce
fortress Europe alarm Ahmad Ali,
a dentist
from a besieged Syrian city
close to the Iraqi
border. He asked us not to show
his face,
for fear of endangering
relatives still in
Syria.
AHMAD ALI, Refugee: We don't
need to go back.
Everybody here is worried about
the situation,
so we just -- we need to cross
the border
to search for our lives. We
can't stay here
for a long time.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Prime
candidates to be among
the first deported are
Pakistanis, who are
regarded by many countries as
economic migrants.
They have been turning up at a
detention center
in Lesbos to be registered. But
in a possible
blow to the E.U.-Turkey deal,
the United Nations
Refugee Agency said it wouldn't
work in these
camps because the migrants and
refugees were
being held against their will.
A large group of Pakistanis were
put in handcuffs
as they were sent to mainland
Greece for what
could be the first leg of a
journey back to
their homeland. The prospect of
being returned
to Pakistan terrifies Imran
Sharif, a Christian
policeman who claims he faces
possible death
for alleged blasphemy against
Islam.
IMRAN SHARIF, Refugee: If the
Greece government
puts me back in Pakistan, where
there are
many people waiting for me to
kill me or put
me in the jail -- I don't like
that somebody
kills me in front of my child,
so if they
are trying to pull me back, I
will suicide
here.
MALCOLM BRABANT: At the camp
that's been sheltering
the Pakistanis next to the
detention center,
volunteer Ayesha Keller had this
advice for
would-be travelers waiting on
the Turkish
coast.
AYESHA KELLER, Volunteer: At the
moment, I
don't think it's worth risking
your life to
cross over to Lesbos or one of
the other Greek
islands, because it's so unclear
what the
situation is. It just doesn't
make sense on
a humanitarian level. And I
thought the E.U.
was about protecting human
rights, and now
they have agreed to something
like this.
I understand what they're trying
to do. I
understand that they want to cut
down smuggling
and they want to cut down people
crossing
in a dangerous way. But this
doesn't just
seem to be a sensible solution.
And it's just
going to increase smuggling, as
all the borders
close. Rather than having a
legal way to cross,
people are going to go across
illegally.
MALCOLM BRABANT: One of the main
reasons why
Turkey has accepted this deal
permitting the
return of migrants is that it
was promised
that its application to join the
European
Union will be fast-tracked. But
the terrorist
attacks in Brussels today have
damaged Turkey's
cause.
Skeptical governments are
reluctant to accept
Turkey because it would extend
the European
borders to Syria and Iraq, and
would possibly
increase the likelihood of
terrorism within
the E.U. And so this
controversial arrangement
could be undermined.
These are hugely uncertain times
for the migrants
trapped in Greece and facing
deportation.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Lesbos.
GWEN IFILL: It's a question of
when, not if,
a major seismic disaster will
strike the Pacific
Northwest. Scientists put the
odds of a big
earthquake and tsunami occurring
within the
next 50 years at 37 percent.
So, what are coastal communities
doing to
prepare and to make sure that
they are resilient
in the face of an extreme event?
"NewsHour" correspondent William
Brangham
decided to find out.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I'm standing
on the coast
of Washington. This is the very
edge of the
continental United States. And
just a few
miles out in the Pacific Ocean
is considered
one of the most dangerous
seismic faults in
all of North America.
Scientists believe if that fault
were to rupture,
it could devastate much of the
Pacific Northwest.
The fault is known as the
Cascadia subduction
zone, where two tectonic plates
meet underneath
the Pacific Ocean. This fault
line stretches
700 miles along the coast.
KEN MURPHY, Federal Emergency
Management Agency:
Earthquakes have no season. It's
earthquake
season every day.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Ken Murphy is
FEMA's regional
administrator. He oversees
emergency operations
for the Northwest region. He
says if this
whole fault were to rupture, not
only would
there be a catastrophic
earthquake, but that
quake would then trigger an
enormous tsunami,
which would crash into the
Pacific Northwest
minutes later.
KEN MURPHY: You roughly have
about 140,000
square miles of communities and
land and people
up and down Washington, Oregon,
and Northern
California.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Major cities
like Seattle,
Vancouver and Portland could be
seriously
damaged. FEMA estimates that in
an 8- or 9-magnitude
quake, nearly 13,000 people
could be killed,
with another 20,000 injured. A
million people
would be made homeless.
And to some, these are
conservative estimates.
KEN MURPHY: It's not just FEMA,
but how we
as a nation are going to respond
to this,
because it's really going to
take everybody's
efforts.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This threat
has people across
the Northwest worried, no more
so than in
coastal Washington, towns like
Westport, Ocean
Shores, Ocosta. Chuck Wallace is
an emergency
manager for this county.
CHUCK WALLACE, Grays Harbor
County Emergency
Manager: If you're in an
inundation zone or
close to the coast, if you feel
an earthquake,
you have to suspect that a
tsunami could be
following. And if there is one,
if they are
coming, we would have anywhere
from 15 to
25 minutes along the coast to
move to higher
ground.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And so the
town of Ocosta,
with just a few thousand
residents, is now
building this, a large tsunami
evacuation
shelter here on top of its
public school.
It's the first of its kind in
North America.
PAULA AKERLUND, Superintendent,
Ocosta School
District: Well, right now we're
in the stair
tower. This is after the
earthquake. We're
evacuating to the rooftop for
the tsunami
evacuation.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So there's
four stairwells
like this one?
PAULA AKERLUND: Yes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Paula Akerlund
is the school
superintendent for the district,
and she was
instrumental in getting this
shelter built.
Akerlund said they started
discussing this
shelter four years ago. In an
ominous coincidence,
hours later, the massive tsunami
hit Japan.
The whole world watched as waves
destroyed
buildings and roads and entire
towns in just
a matter of minutes.
PAULA AKERLUND: We learned a lot
about what
to do in this building from the
Japanese earthquake
and tsunami. So, one of the
things that we
knew from Japan is that some
buildings were
overtopped.
(CROSSTALK)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Water coming
up over the
roof.
PAULA AKERLUND: Yes. And so we
tried to make
the walls here high enough so
that that would
no happen. And then, also, I
think it will
serve another purpose, because
there will
be children up here with us and
they won't
really see what's happening, I
think, for
awhile. I think that might be a
good thing.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Oh, so the
walls will protect
them from watching their
community.
PAULA AKERLUND: Kind of protect
them from
watching.
Our whole focus is on the safety
and welfare
of the kids, and so we try to
think about
things like that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And the kids
in Ocosta have
been absorbing some of this
concern too. Listen
to what we happened to hear in
this sixth
grade class.
WOMAN: Andrew, what are you
reading?
STUDENT: I'm reading "Escaping
the Giant Wave."
WOMAN: Oh, "Escaping the Giant
Wave."
Several of us sitting here have
been having
tsunami dreams. And we're just
taking it to
mean that it's because it's in
the news, not
that it's any kind of
premonition. Yes, not
going to happen, just something
because we
talk about it and stuff. But
tell me about
the title. How does the title
fit in with
what you're reading so far?
STUDENT: The news truck blared
out there was
a tsunami coming at 5:30, and it
was 5:20.
WOMAN: And was there actually a
tsunami coming?
STUDENT: Yes.
WOMAN: Yes. Goodness' sakes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The highly
reinforced structure
they have built isn't just to
protect the
620 students at the school. The
roof can hold
nearly 2,000 people, and
officials say no
one would be turned away in a
disaster, and
the shelter will be accessible
24/7 from this
point forward.
The total cost? Just over $2
million. And
get this: No state or federal
money was used
offered to build it. Locals had
to vote on
a bond specifically to raise
their own taxes
to build this, and this isn't a
wealthy community.
PAULA AKERLUND: I had no idea
whether it would
pass or not.
I told one of our teachers, if
the bond passes,
I will be doing a happy dance,
and he told
me it's going to pass by 70
percent. And it
did, it did. And I was doing a
little happy
little dance, yes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But how likely
is it that
this shelter will ever be
needed? Skeptics
can point out that there's no
recorded history
of a major quake and tsunami
here, so what's
the likelihood?
Well, the answer to that can be
found in one
of the great seismological
detective stories,
and it happened here on the
Copalis River,
about 40 miles north of Ocosta.
I went up
the river with local guide Dave
Agner.
Do you know how tall these
cedars would've
been back in their day?
This is what's known as the
Ghost Forest.
These dead cedar trees hold a
crucial clue
to the very real danger facing
the Pacific
Northwest.
DAVE AGNER, Guide: William,
straight ahead
at 12:00. You see that tree that
is partially
in the river and partially on
the land?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For years, it
was thought
these trees had died over time,
decades apart.
But in the late 1980s, two
scientists found
evidence that these trees all
died simultaneously,
when the ground beneath them
plunged downwards
several feet, which is often
what occurs in
subduction zone earthquakes.
They found strong evidence of a
major quake
300 years ago, but had it also
triggered a
tsunami? A few years later, a
Japanese scientist
proved that it had. He was
looking through
centuries-old records trying to
understand
a mysterious tsunami that hit
Japan in 1700.
When he saw the data from
Washington's Ghost
Forest, he realized they were
the exact same
event.
That quake off Washington's
coast sent a tsunami
that not only flooded the
Pacific Northwest,
but also traveled 5,000 miles
across the ocean
and hit Japan.
DAVE AGNER: There was evidence
of a massive
one in 1700, and the Japanese
kept fantastic
records. The shoguns required
very, very good
record-keeping, or you could
lose your life
if you promised a certain crop
and it didn't
come in.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Just a few
miles from the
Ghost Forest, another community
is trying
to grapple with this looming
threat in an
even more dramatic fashion. The
Quinault Indian
Nation has lived along this
coast for centuries.
Fawn Sharp is their president.
FAWN SHARP, President, Quinault
Indian Nation:
If you look behind me, you will
see where
our treaty was negotiated in
1855 at the mouth
of the Quinault River, where the
Quinault
River meets the ocean. And it's
150 years
ago. Nobody at that time ever
anticipated
that this entire central part of
our community
would ever be underwater.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This aerial
rendering of
their village shows how, in the
event of a
quake and tsunami, the entire
area would be
inundated with water. So,
they're going to
move the whole village up the
hill to this
spot. But moving an entire
village is not
easy.
FAWN SHARP: These are major
facilities. This
is a brand-new courthouse,
fairly new.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And that's
going to have
to be moved?
FAWN SHARP: And that's going to
have to be
moved. Our community center, our
central gathering
place will have to obviously be
moved.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's a lot
of structures.
FAWN SHARP: Yes. Our membership
sees the exciting
opportunity of creating a new
village and
what that might look like, but
so many of
our memories are here in this
village, and
the thought of it being
underwater, you know,
there's a lot of trauma to that
prospect that
a very sacred site could no
longer exist.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The Quinault
hope to have
the entire village moved to
higher ground
within the next five years.
Back in Ocosta, the tsunami
shelter is just
getting its finishing touches.
Officials say,
if a quake hit tomorrow, the
shelter's ready
to hold anyone who can get here.
Emergency manager Chuck Wallace
says this
building, and how it got built,
is a model
of what a community can do.
CHUCK WALLACE: You know, you sit
back and
they always say, well,
government did this,
government did that. No, the
people did this.
PAULA AKERLUND: This very small
community,
very self-reliant community
takes care of
each other. People here were
willing to increase
their tax dollars to build this
facility for
their kids and their
grandchildren. So, I
think that that's a remarkable
thing.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: They hope to
have a ribbon-cutting
for the shelter in June.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham
along the Washington coast.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: diamond
diplomacy, and
a unique stage to heal decades
of division.
Jeffrey Brown has our story.
JEFFREY BROWN: It was baseball
with a Cuban
flair, as the thaw in U.S.-Cuban
diplomatic
relations spilled into the realm
of sports,
and a game with deep histories
in both nations.
The crowd cheered when President
Obama joined
Cuban President Raul Castro for
a game between
the Tampa Bay Rays and the Cuban
national
team, just the second such game
in more than
50 years. There was a moment of
silence for
the victims of the Belgium
terror attacks,
followed by the singing of the
national anthems
of both countries.
The ceremonial first pitches
were thrown by
Luis Tiant, Cuban native and
former Major
League star, and legendary Cuban
national
team pitcher Pedro Luis Lazo.
And then the
game was on, with a bit more
symbolism.
Rays lead-off batter Dayron
Varona is a native
Cuban who defected to the U.S.
three years
ago in the hopes of playing
ball. One anticipated
byproduct of the warming
U.S.-Cuban relations
would be a relaxation of the
embargo that
bans Cuban players from playing
in the U.S.
Peter Bjarkman has written
widely on baseball
in Cuba.
PETER BJARKMAN, Author, "A
History of Cuban
Baseball": The difficulty right
now is that
the players can only find a way
to Major League
Baseball if they defect, because
they're not
allowed to legally emigrate out
of the country
to come and play professional
baseball.
So far, nothing has changed the
position of
the Cuban government. They are
willing to
talk about making some of their
players available,
but they want to control the
ownership of
those players, have them come
back, play during
the winter season in Cuba, play
on the Cuban
national team.
JEFFREY BROWN: When the Rays
scored the first
run of the game, Michelle Obama
cheered, and
there was a handshake between
the two presidents.
In an interview with ESPN
commentators, President
Obama spoke of the role of
baseball in bring
social change, citing the
example of Jackie
Robinson, who once played in
Cuba and whose
widow, Rachel, attended the
game.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
If you think about Jackie
Robinson playing
in this ball park a couple of
months before
he breaks the color barrier in
Major League
Baseball, that is the power of
baseball. That's
the power of sports.
It can change attitudes
sometimes in ways
that a politician can never
change.
JEFFREY BROWN: The president
left after three
innings. The Major League Tampa
Bay Rays went
on to win the game 4-1.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can watch
more of Jeff's
conversation with Peter Bjarkman
about the
future of Cuban and American
baseball. That's
on our home page.
Also on the "NewsHour" online:
As President
Obama prepares to leave Cuba,
the artist known
as El Sexto, which means The
Sixth, is raising
the issue of free expression in
his country
through performance art. He was
arrested Sunday
after taking part in a peaceful
protest, but
released later that day.
You can learn more about the
dissident artist.
We put together several videos
that show his
work, and you can find those on
our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: And updating our top
story: Police
in Belgium are engaged in a
full-scale manhunt
tonight after the bombings in
Brussels claimed
by the Islamic State group.
Two suicide attackers struck the
city's airport
and subway system. They killed
at least 34
people and wounded more than
180, including
some Americans. It's believed a
third suspect
escaped. The Belgian capital was
locked down
for much of the day. And
security was stepped
up around Europe and in major
U.S. cities.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.